Updates to Smsdedbg per issue 21 and 26 (#35)
riscv/riscv-smmtt: chapter8.adoc

[[chapter8]]
[[Smsdedbg]]

> == Supervisor Domain External Trace and Debug

Author: defined

> == Supervisor Domain External Trace and Debug

Reviewer: could you specifically point out where it is defined? I could not find any.

The <<MSDCFG>> CSR contains the `sdedbgalw` and `sdetrcalw` bits that control
whether the current scheduled SD is allowed to be external-debugged or to be

> external-traced respectively.

Author: yes this extension related only to external debug and external trace interactions with supervisor domains - added a note in the introduction of this section.

> external-traced respectively.

Reviewer: Your point extends the scope of the current trace spec very much. The trace control now is defined could either be accessed "internally" and "externally". They will be both affected by "halted" signal, thus your point "this extension related only to external debug and external trace interactions with supervisor domains" cannot be interpreted correctly if not otherwise explained. 
The idea of isolating "external" and "internal" must involve sufficient DTPM discussion and cannot easily made.

=== `Smsdedbg`: External Debug allowed control for Supervisor Domain

When M-mode external debug is enabled, all supervisor domains may also be
debugged by an external debugger irrespective of the configuration held in
`msdcfg.SDEDBGALW`.

When M-mode external debug is disabled, whether execution at privilege modes
less than `M-mode` may be debugged by an external debugger depends on the
configuration held in `msdcfg.SDEDBGALW`.

When `msdcfg.SDEDBGALW` = 0, external debug is disallowed for the SD. Abstract

> commands and halt request from the debug module are suppressed and stay pending

Author: added a note to serve as a catch all for other debug operations (currently defined or may be defined in the future) must be kept pending while the SD that has opt'ed out of external debug is active on a hart.

> commands and halt request from the debug module are suppressed and stay pending

Reviewer: Not all debug operation pends. For example, a trigger set for M-mode to enter Debug Mode  cannot pend if `medbgen` is 0, because it might block other triggers to take effect which is configured for submachine mode.

while the SD is active.

When `msdcfg.SDEDBGALW` = 1 then external debug of privilege modes less than
`M-mode` is allowed for the SD, and:

> * A halt request may transition the hart to Debug Mode.

Reviewer 2: This bullet can be expanded to say "A halt request or a trigger matching/firing.."
The resethaltreq is not applicable - reset halt can be done only following a reset and one cannot be privilege mode less than M with msdcfg.SDEDBGALW=1 at deassertion of reset.

> * A halt request may transition the hart to Debug Mode.

Reviewer: "one cannot be privilege mode less than M with msdcfg.SDEDBGALW=1 at deassertion of reset." This point ought to be clearly included in main text.

> * A halt request may transition the hart to Debug Mode.

Author: fixed.

> * Abstract commands and program buffer execution can access state of privilege

Author: expanded to clarify that "state" includes all resources accessible per the Debug spec (added a citation as well).

modes less than `M-mode`.

> * Read and Write of `Sdtrig` and `Sdext` CSRs are allowed.

Author: so the statement is qualified by the title of the header of the bullet points - specifically - "When `msdcfg.SDEDBGALW` = 1 then external debug of privilege modes less than `M-mode` is allowed for the SD on a per-hart basis, and:" -> Read and Write of `Sdtrig` and `Sdext` CSRs are allowed . 
Once the SD opts in to external debug, all rules specified in debug spec for CSR accesses by the SD or by M on behalf of the SD apply so we don't have to restate those IMO.

> * Read and Write of `Sdtrig` and `Sdext` CSRs are allowed.

Reviewer: It introduce security holes. If you look at sdtrig CSR tdata1. It could set trigger for machine mode (e.g. set trigger to raise exception in M-mode when it is not yet context switched). In your statement, it just expose the privilege escalation attack vector. 
BTW, what do you mean by "M on behalf of the SD"?

> * Read and Write of `Sdtrig` and `Sdext` CSRs are allowed.

Author: "M on behalf of the SD" -> means RDSM enforcing any rules since it is in the TCB of the SDs.
an e.g. for this is -  we just added a note that for any triggers a SD sets up, RDSM must ensure the m bit is cleared so that prevents the scenario you mentioned.

can you clarify what security holes you see?

> * Read and Write of `Sdtrig` and `Sdext` CSRs are allowed.

Reviewer: Sure, of course. What I mentioned above is exactly an example of hole and it cannot be prevented by RDSM, because the external debugger set it without involvement of RDSM.

> * Read and Write of `Sdtrig` and `Sdext` CSRs are allowed.

Author: M-mode needs to protect itself in this case. which is we have the new proposed behavior change (that I hope you will pull into the ext secure debug spec), specifically:

When `medbgen` is 0 and privilege is `M-mode`:
* M-mode can read and write triggers, *including triggers with `dmode` = 1 without restrictions*.
* Abstract commands and requests from an external debugger, that transition the hart into a halted state, stay pending while privilege is `M-mode` cite:[ExtDbg].
* All trigger-matching is prevented from matching or firing, similar to how `MIE` or `MTE` would behave.

> * Read and Write of `Sdtrig` and `Sdext` CSRs are allowed.

Reviewer: `MIE` and `MTE` solution is to tackle re-entrance problem (with action=0), while the issue I mentioned in my previous post is about the trigger traps into M-mode. Re-entrance issue only happens after it. 
More importantly, the statement "similar to how MIE or MTE would behave." is misleading. I thought it means:
- similar to action=0, the triggers with action=1 are prevented from firing/matching to enter Debug Mode

But based on your comment, seems it is supposed to convey different idea:

- triggers with action=1 are prevented from enter debug mode in M-mode
- triggers with action=0 are prevented from raising exception in M-mode

The second bullet is brand new idea and never bought up. I think we need involve more people discuss about the scope it affected. 

Above all, "similar to how MIE or MTE would behave." has to be taken out. It gives misleading idea.

> * Read and Write of `Sdtrig` and `Sdext` CSRs are allowed.

Reviewer: "All trigger-matching" - could implies address/data/exception/interrupt matching (which is arguably intuitive for readers). It is not a good point to keep ambiguous statement based on personal understanding. 

It is a brand new in the scope of external debug security.
If you quote the whole context, it could be easily identified that the Debug spec introduce them to solve re-entrance issue, which prevents exception from same privilege (e.g. M-mode->M-mode).
But in scope of external debug, the implication is to prevent the exception from lower privilege (e.g. S-mode -> M-mode). Both the hardware implementation and software use case are different.

> * Read and Write of `Sdtrig` and `Sdext` CSRs are allowed.

Reviewer: If I didn't make the point clear enough, we could probably discuss it further in tomorrow's external debug TG meeting? 

[https://zoom.us/j/99483621157?pwd=cXYvT0I4QXBMdEZlVkhjbnRtUEdrUT09](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://zoom.us/j/99483621157?pwd%3DcXYvT0I4QXBMdEZlVkhjbnRtUEdrUT09&sa=D&source=calendar&usd=2&usg=AOvVaw3-CCTBCDyWhEIIJEWGPueR)

> * Read and Write of `Sdtrig` and `Sdext` CSRs are allowed.

Reviewer 2: I suggest using the precise words from section 5.4 and section 5.7.6, repeated above, rather than loose re-interpretations like  "which prevents exception from same privilege".

> * Read and Write of `Sdtrig` and `Sdext` CSRs are allowed.

Reviewer: Before driving this topic off-track, I would strongly suggest let's discuss it on TG meeting . Honestly, I don't think we are talking about the same thing.

> * Read and Write of `Sdtrig` and `Sdext` CSRs are allowed.

Author: I added normative references to section 5.4 and 5.7.6 of Debug spec.

* Debugger memory accesses occur with either `S-mode` or `U-mode` privilege (as

> if `aamvirtual` = 1 and `MPP` != `M-mode`).

Reviewer: The problem brought up here is not yet addressed. It will break debug use cases.

> if `aamvirtual` = 1 and `MPP` != `M-mode`).

Reviewer 2: The key word is "as if". The "Access Memory" command is specified in section 3.7.1.3. This command lets debugger perform memory access. The arg0 of this command has aamvirtual which when set to 1 indicates the address is a virtual address - and these are translated the same way as they would be from M-mode, with MPRV set. The abstract commands can only execute at U or S mode when medbgen is 0 and they will always execute as-if aamvirtual = 1 and MPP !=M-mode. Please clarify what debug use cases get affected.

> if `aamvirtual` = 1 and `MPP` != `M-mode`).

Reviewer: The statement says "S-mode or U-mode", but basically which one? According to value in MPP or what else? The spec needs clear definition on access privilege. Otherwise, it leaves impression that use cases are affected.

> if `aamvirtual` = 1 and `MPP` != `M-mode`).

Reviewer: This point must be clearly defined in main content. But currently not a clue.

> if `aamvirtual` = 1 and `MPP` != `M-mode`).

Author: please clarify what is unclear in the statement in the text:
Debugger memory accesses occur with either `S-mode` or `U-mode` privilege (as if `aamvirtual` = 1 and `MPP` != `M-mode`).

==== `Smsdedbg` interaction with external debug security controls (Informative)

[caption="Figure {counter:image}: ", reftext="Figure {image}"]
[title= "External Debug for Supervisor Domain", id=Smsdedbg_img]
image::images/Smsdedbg.png[]

This section will be moved into the specification for external debug security.
It is described in this specification as informational.

The `medbgen` is an enable control for external debug for the M-mode driven by
the debug module and is expected to be established by the RoT (following RISC-V
Security Model recommendation SR_GEN_007 and SR_GEN_012). When privilege is `M`,

> the `medbgen` gates the `haltreq` from the debug module and if is 0 prevents

Author: I presume you are specifying the additional rules in the secure external debug spec ISA - in this spec I am only specifying the msdcfg control bits and how it figures into the gating of haltreq.
I will add a reference to the ext secure debug spec (once it is available).

> the `medbgen` gates the `haltreq` from the debug module and if is 0 prevents

Reviewer: It is very confusing. Because in other paragraph (above and blow), the trigger, abstract commands are mentioned. I don't think user can get the point "in this spec I am only specifying the msdcfg control bits and how it figures into the gating of haltreq."

> the `medbgen` gates the `haltreq` from the debug module and if is 0 prevents

Author: I can add a note to that effect in the intro such that the reader is aware that they should read the "secure external debug spec" as well to get the full picture.

> the `medbgen` gates the `haltreq` from the debug module and if is 0 prevents

Reviewer: It helps little. The right direction is if the feature/behavior is mentioned in two spec, it should be described thoroughly in both.

> the `medbgen` gates the `haltreq` from the debug module and if is 0 prevents

Author: Again, the main spec should be the ext. secure debug spec - we cannot repeat information in 2 specs - that will lead to inconsistency and bugs - the goal of this supervisor domains spec chapter is to describe the additional requirements i.e. 2 things: 1. the controls specified in msdcfg for sdedbgalw and sdetrcalw and how they feed into/gate medbgen  2. the behavior change in m-mode to allow it to access debug CSRs when d-mode=1 so that when it is not under external debug it can manage ext debug of a SD that opts in. 

can we agree on this partitioning of the spec first? cc @joxie

> the `medbgen` gates the `haltreq` from the debug module and if is 0 prevents

Author: Added a note in the intro and a citation for https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/riscv-external-debug-security/blob/main/external-debug-security.pdf

the hart from entering external debug mode.

The following change is proposed to behavior of `M-mode` access to triggers with
`dmode` = 1. This change allows the RDSM to remain in control of external debug

> for supervisor domains (unless the RDSM is itself under external debug).

Reviewer: What does "unless" implies? Do you mean that when medbgen=1, the M-mode SW still cannot write triggers if dmode=1?
If so, the behavior needs to be clearly outlined.

Author: clarified that this feature relaxation takes effect only if medbgen is deasserted, o/w if the RDSM is itself under debug due to medbgen being asserted then this change is don't care.

When `medbgen` is 0 and privilege is `M-mode`:

* M-mode can read and write triggers, *including triggers with `dmode` = 1
without restrictions*.

> * Abstract commands and halt request from external debugger stay pending while

Reviewer 2: Only two aspects matter here - issuing abstract commands and issuing a halt request. The ability of the debug module to assert and deassert reset has to be controlled in the debug module. Please clarify more what "locked PMP access" means and what is included in "etc.".

> * Abstract commands and halt request from external debugger stay pending while

Reviewer: > Only two aspects matter here - issuing abstract commands and issuing a halt request. The ability of the debug module to assert and deassert reset has to be controlled in the debug module. Please clarify more what "locked PMP access" means and what is included in "etc.".

Triggers, SBA, and probably something else.

privilege is `M-mode`.

> * All trigger-matching is suppressed (similar to how `MIE` or `MTE` would

Reviewer: It is not comparable. The incoming interrupt blocked by MIE will be pending and fire when it is allowed (e.g. entering a less privileged mode). But a matching trigger in M mode should NOT be pending and enter Debug Mode when it enters SD. Neither should icout trigger increment if it hit interrupt in M mode.
The word "suppress" is ambiguous. It must be clearly stated whether it pends or is dropped.

Author: clarified that it is prevented from matching.

suppress them)

When privilege is less than `M`, the OR of the `MSDCFG.sdedbgalw` and `medbgen`
gates the `haltreq` from the debug module and the hart will enter Debug
Mode if either is 1.

> The configuration for `MSDCFG.sdedbgalw` may be obtained from the manifest/

Author: right - i put it into a note.

[[chapter8]]
[[Smsdedbg]]
== Supervisor Domain External Trace and Debug

The <<MSDCFG>> CSR contains the `sdedbgalw` and `sdetrcalw` bits that control
whether the current scheduled SD is allowed to be external-debugged or to be

> external-traced (independently). These control bits are context switched (as

Reviewer 2: (independently) -> respectively. 
The last sentence can be removed as it is implied by "current scheduled SD"

> external-traced (independently). These control bits are context switched (as
> part of the `msdcfg`) per SD.

Author: ```suggestion
external-traced respectively.
```

=== `Smsdedbg`: External Debug allowed control for Supervisor Domain

When M-mode external debug is enabled, all supervisor domains may also be
debugged by an external debugger irrespective of the configuration held in
`msdcfg.SDEDBGALW`.

When M-mode external debug is disabled, whether execution at privilege modes
less than `M-mode` may be debugged by an external debugger depends on the
configuration held in `msdcfg.SDEDBGALW`.

When `msdcfg.SDEDBGALW` = 0, external debug is disallowed for the SD. Abstract
commands and halt request from the debug module are suppressed and stay pending
while the SD is active.

When `msdcfg.SDEDBGALW` = 1 then external debug of privilege modes less than
`M-mode` is allowed for the SD, and:

* A halt request may transition the hart to Debug Mode.
* Abstract commands and program buffer execution can access state of privilege
modes less than `M-mode`.

> * Read and Write of `Sdtrig` CSRs is allowed.

Author: wanted to be explicit about it - are you saying, if we do mention it, we should say:

> Read and Write of debug-related CSRs is allowed

> * Read and Write of `Sdtrig` CSRs is allowed.

Reviewer 2: I think we   should add "Sdext" CSRs also.

> * Read and Write of `Sdtrig` CSRs is allowed.

Author: ```suggestion
* Read and Write of `Sdtrig` and `Sdext` CSRs are allowed.
```

> * Read and Write of `Sdtrig` CSRs is allowed.

Author: ack

=== `Smsdetrc`: External Trace allowed control for Supervisor Domain

When M-mode external trace is enabled, all supervisor domains activity may also
be traced by an external trace tool irrespective of the configuration held in
`msdcfg.sdetralw`.

When M-mode external trace is disabled, whether execution at privilege modes
less than `M-mode` may be traced by an external trace tool depends on the
configuration held in `msdcfg.sdetrcalw`, as described below:

When `msdcfg.sdetrcalw` = 0, external trace is disallowed for the SD. All trace
output from the trace encoder module are disabled while the SD is active on a
per-hart basis.

When `msdcfg.sdetrcalw` = 1 then external trace of privilege modes less than
`M-mode` shall be allowed for the SD on a per hart basis.

To enforce the above controls specified by this extension, the following
functional and security requirements must be met by the external secure debug
system cite:[ExtDbgSec] to meet the security objectives of supervisor domain
isolation:

. External trace of M-mode can be enabled only by the HW RoT of the RDSM
 (See RISC-V Security model requirements SR_GEN_007 and SR_GEN_012).

> . Per the Efficient trace specification cite:[ETrc], the side-band `halted`
>   signal being asserted, stops subsequent tracing from the hart. On this signal
>   being deasserted, the encoder can start tracing again. Implementation of this
>   `halted` side-band signal is required to support external tracing with
>   supervisor domains. The state of the `halted` side-band signal shall be gated
>   by the external tracing enable control for M-mode.

Author: ```suggestion
```

[[chapter8]]
[[Smsdedbg]]

> == Supervisor Domain External Trace and Debug

Reviewer 2: why not make two sections - one per extension

description and behavior of controls outside the scope of this specification,
but which interact with controls specified in this specification when one or
more supervisor domains are used. Note that `Smsdedbg` and `Smsdetrc` may be
used as independent extensions even when a single supervisor domain is being
utilized on a platform.

[NOTE]
====
The configuration for `msdcfg.sdedbgalw` and `msdcfg.sdetrcalw` is expected to
be obtained from the manifest/configuration of the supervisor domain and
reported in the attestation report for the supervisor domain and it's workloads.
The RDSM should manage this supervisor domain configuration state for context
switching using secure memory.
====

=== `Smsdedbg`: External Debug allowed control for Supervisor Domain

When M-mode external debug is enabled, all supervisor domains may also be
debugged by an external debugger irrespective of the configuration held in
`msdcfg.sdedbgalw`.

When M-mode external debug is disabled, whether execution at privilege modes
less than `M-mode` may be debugged by an external debugger depends on the
configuration held in `msdcfg.sdedbgalw`, as described below:

> When `msdcfg.sdedbgalw` = 0, external debug is disallowed for the supervisor
> domain. Abstract commands and halt request from the debug module are suppressed
> and stay pending while the supervisor domain is active, on a per-hart basis.
> Other debug operations (current or defined in the future) must similarly be kept
> pending while the supervisor domain is active on a hart. Triggers for the
> supervisor domain must be controlled by the RDSM to prevent any leakage of
> information across security domains.

Author: ```suggestion
When `msdcfg.sdedbgalw` is 0:

* Access by external debuggers to the memory and/or state of the supervisor domain is disallowed.
* Entry to Debug Mode from a supervisor domain is disallowed.

```

> 

Reviewer 2: This para can be replaced with:
When `msdcfg.sdedbgalw` is 0:
- Access by external debuggers to the memory and/or state of the supervisor domain is disallowed.
- Entry to Debug Mode from a supervisor domain is disallowed.

(Do not need to say anything special about triggers).

Author: sg

When `msdcfg.sdedbgalw` = 1 then external debug of privilege modes less than
`M-mode` is allowed for such a supervisor domain on a per-hart basis. +

> 

Reviewer 2: When msdcfg.sdedbgalw is 1:
1. Access by external debuggers to the memory and/or state of the supervisor domain is allowed.
2. Entry to Debug Mode from a supervisor domain is allowed.

Author: added the 2 points in the requirements below.

To enforce the above controls specified by this extension, the following
functional and security requirements must be met by the external secure debug
system cite:[ExtDbgSec] to meet the security objectives of supervisor domain
isolation:

> . The enable control for external debug driven by the external debug module is
>   expected to be established by the platform root-of-trust following RISC-V
>   Security Model recommendations SR_GEN_007 and SR_GEN_012. When the control is
>   in cleared state, the hart should not be able to enter external debug.

Author: ```suggestion
. External debug of M-mode can be enabled only by the HW RoT of the RDSM
 (See RISC-V Security model requirements SR_GEN_007 and SR_GEN_012)..
```

>   in cleared state, the hart should not be able to enter external debug.

Author: ack

. External debug must be able to transition the hart to Debug Mode and access

>   supervisor domain memory and state. In this context, "state" includes all

Reviewer 2: Transition to debug mode is not a pre-requisite for accessing memory or state. Suggest removing this bullet since this is already stated before.

Author: fixed - i kept the above two points in the requirements section below:
- Access by external debuggers to the memory and/or state of the supervisor domain is allowed.
-Entry to Debug Mode from a supervisor domain is allowed.

  non-M-mode resources accessible per the Debug specification cite:[ExtDbg].
. Triggers must match and fire on a hart only when a supervisor domain with this

>   configuration is active on a hart (and not in M-mode).

Reviewer 2: This can also be removed since we already stated that Debug Mode cannot be entered. Firing or/not of triggers depends on context switching of the triggers by the RDSM.

Author: ack

. The RDSM must be able to context switch all triggers even when `d-mode` = 1.
  This functional change allows the RDSM to remain in control of external debug
  for supervisor domains when it is not under external debug itself.

The following figure is non-normative and is intended to illustrate the use of
the `msdcfg.sdedbgalw` control - the normative specification will be in the

> specification for external debug security cite:[ExtDbgSec].

Reviewer 2: This picture can also be removed.

Author: ack

> The following figure is non-normative and is intended to illustrate the use of
> the `msdcfg.sdedbgalw` control - the normative specification will be in the
> specification for external debug security cite:[ExtDbgSec].
> 
> [caption="Figure {counter:image}: ", reftext="Figure {image}"]

Author: ```suggestion
```

> [title= "External Debug opt-in for Supervisor Domain", id=Smsdedbg_img]
> image::images/Smsdedbg.png[]
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

=== `Smsdetrc`: External Trace allowed control for Supervisor Domain

When M-mode external trace is enabled, all supervisor domains activity may also
be traced by an external trace tool irrespective of the configuration held in
`msdcfg.sdetralw`.

When M-mode external trace is disabled, whether execution at privilege modes
less than `M-mode` may be traced by an external trace tool depends on the
configuration held in `msdcfg.sdetrcalw`, as described below:

> When `msdcfg.sdetrcalw` = 0, external trace is disallowed for the SD. All trace
> output from the trace encoder module are disabled while the SD is active on a
> per-hart basis.

Author: ```suggestion
When `msdcfg.sdetrcalw` = 0, external trace of the SD is disallowed.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: "while SD is.." can be removed. Can just state "When `msdcfg.sdetrcalw` = 0, external trace of the SD is disallowed".

Author: ack

When `msdcfg.sdetrcalw` = 1 then external trace of privilege modes less than
`M-mode` shall be allowed for the SD on a per hart basis.

To enforce the above controls specified by this extension, the following
functional and security requirements must be met by the external secure debug
system cite:[ExtDbgSec] to meet the security objectives of supervisor domain
isolation:

. The enable control for external trace driven by the external trace module is
  expected to be established by the platform root-of-trust following RISC-V
  Security Model recommendations SR_GEN_007 and SR_GEN_012. When the control is

>   in cleared state, the hart should not be able to generate trace.

Reviewer 2: Same comment as previous section.

Author: ack

> . The enable control for external trace driven by the external trace module is
>   expected to be established by the platform root-of-trust following RISC-V
>   Security Model recommendations SR_GEN_007 and SR_GEN_012. When the control is
>   in cleared state, the hart should not be able to generate trace.

Author: ```suggestion
. External trace of M-mode can be enabled only by the HW RoT of the RDSM
 (See RISC-V Security model requirements SR_GEN_007 and SR_GEN_012).
```

. Per the Efficient trace specification cite:[ETrc], the side-band `halted`
  signal being asserted, stops subsequent tracing from the hart. On this signal
  being deasserted, the encoder can start tracing again. Implementation of this
  `halted` side-band signal is required to support external tracing with
  supervisor domains. The state of the `halted` side-band signal shall be gated

>   by the external tracing enable control for M-mode.

Reviewer 2: This detail is not required. Suffices to say trace is disallowed for this section.

Author: ack

. When external tracing is disabled, tracing should be stopped (via asserting
  `halted`) on:
.. entry to Debug mode
.. entry to `M-mode` privilege
.. entry to privilege less than `M-mode` with `msdcfg.sdetrcalw` = 0.
. When extracing tracing is disabled, tracing should be started (via deasserting
  `halted`) on:
.. Entry to privilege less than `M-mode` with `msdcfg.sdetrcalw` = 0

> 

Author: I think it will be good to put these requirements (i can remove the reference to `halted`) as I address the above comment.

When external tracing is enabled (and authorized), there are no restrictions and
all privilege modes (inclusive of `M-mode` and any supervisor domains managed by

> the RDSM) are traceable. In this case, tracing shall be enabled (via asserting

Reviewer 2: all privilege modes (inclusive of `M-mode`  -> this is not right. This section only talks about SD and should not make a statement that enabling tracing for SD enables tracing of M-mode.

Author: sorry I meant when M-mode external tracing is enabled - anyway - this comment is not needed any more I think.

> When external tracing is enabled (and authorized), there are no restrictions and
> all privilege modes (inclusive of `M-mode` and any supervisor domains managed by
> the RDSM) are traceable. In this case, tracing shall be enabled (via asserting
> `halted`) on entry to Debug mode, and stopped on resumption from Debug Mode.

Author: ```suggestion
```

[[chapter8]]
[[Smsdedbg]]
== Supervisor Domain External Trace and Debug

The <<MSDCFG>> CSR contains the `sdedbgalw` and `sdetrcalw` bits that control

> if the current scheduled SD is allowed to be external-debugged cite:[ExtDbg]

Author: ack

or to be external-traced, respectively. External trace refers to tracing
software running on a separate target RISC-V platform, via a trace control/data
transport that provides external access to the trace encoder controls

> cite:[ETrc]. This extension only affects debug or trace orchestrated by an

Author: reason i did not do that once since we don't refer to anything from the TCI in this spec per se.

external actor. Self-hosted debug (and trace) are managed by the RDSM.

=== `Smsdedbg`: External Debug allowed control for Supervisor Domain

When M-mode external debug is enabled, all supervisor domains may also be
debugged by an external debugger irrespective of the configuration held in
`msdcfg.SDEDBGALW`.

When M-mode external debug is disabled, whether execution at privilege modes
less than `M-mode` may be debugged by an external debugger depends on the
configuration held in `msdcfg.SDEDBGALW`.

When `msdcfg.SDEDBGALW` = 0, external debug is disallowed for the SD. Abstract
commands and halt request from the debug module are suppressed and stay pending
while the SD is active, on a per-hart basis. Other debug operations (current or
defined in the future) must similarly be kept pending while the SD is active on
a hart.

When `msdcfg.SDEDBGALW` = 1 then external debug of privilege modes less than
`M-mode` is allowed for the SD on a per-hart basis, and:

> * A valid request e.g. `haltreq` may transition the hart to Debug Mode. See
> other cases in RISC-V Debug specification cite:[ExtDbg].

Author: ```suggestion
* A valid request (e.g. `halt`) or a trigger matching/firing may transition the hart to
Debug Mode. See other cases in RISC-V Debug specification cite:[ExtDbg]. 
Note that the `resethaltreq` is not applicable since it can be done only
following a reset and the hart cannot be at privilege mode less than
`M-mode` with `msdcfg.SDEDBGALW`=1 at de-assertion of reset.
```

* Abstract commands and program buffer execution can access state of privilege
modes less than `M-mode`. In this context, "state" includes all resources

> accessible per the Debug specification cite:[ExtDbg].

Reviewer: It is contradictory, debug spec states the it have "God" mode privilege and could access all resources, not constrained by privilege modes.

Author: sorry I don't understand what you are referring to as contradictory - can you clarify?
we are stating when M-mode external debug is disabled, whether execution at privilege modes less than `M-mode` may be debugged by an external debugger depends on the configuration held in `msdcfg.SDEDBGALW` -  so only when additionally `msdcfg.SDEDBGALW` = 1 then external debug of privilege modes less than `M-mode` is allowed for the SD on a per-hart basis, and within that scope all state of the SD can be accessed.

Reviewer: I mean ""state" includes all resources accessible per the Debug specification", contradicts the "access state of privilege modes less than `M-mode`".
People get confused when read smmtt and debug spec

Author: will it help to restate as: 
"* Abstract commands and program buffer execution can access state of the SD that opted in to allow external debug. Here state includes system resources of privilege modes less than `M-mode` accessible per the Debug specification cite:[ExtDbg] ." 
- hope this clearly qualifies the statement.

Reviewer: Actually the statement go against the debug specification. Instead of "per the Debug specification", it should be per risc-v privileged spec.

Reviewer 2: I think the "all resources accessible" is the right term. There are 3 abstract commands - access register, quick access, and access memory. The access register command is used to access abstract registers (table 4) - CSRs, GPRs, and floating point registers. The quick access is used to execute the program buffer. Access memory is used to access memory. Program buffer execution can be used to execute instructions. The CSR, GPRs, and FP registers must be the state of the SD i.e. CSRs cannot be M-mode or D-mode CSRs. The instructions executed from program buffer cannot access any M-mode CSRs.

Reviewer 3: In addition to CSRs, memory access should be protected by PMP, MTT. E.g. a SD should not be able to access other SD's memory or M-mode memory (if memory region is not shared). 
In summary, referring to ExtDbg spec seems the correct way to me.

may be entered but may be restricted by `M-mode` software by the setting of the
`MSDCFG.sdedbgalw` control to prevent privileged CSR accesses, memory accesses
by instructions executed, abstract commands in Debug Mode cannot use `M-mode`
privilege.

When `medbgen` is 0 and `MSDCFG.sdedbgalw` is also 0, triggers for the
supervisor domain must be controlled by the root domain security manager to
prevent any leakage of information across security domains. For example, RDSM
should enforce triggers are programmed with `mcontrol.m` bit clear.

=== `Smsdetrc`: External Trace allowed control for Supervisor Domain

When M-mode external trace is enabled, all supervisor domains activity may also
be traced by an external trace tool irrespective of the configuration held in
`msdcfg.SDETRCALW`.

When M-mode external trace is disabled, whether execution at privilege modes
less than `M-mode` may be traced by an external trace tool depends on the
configuration held in `msdcfg.SDETRCALW`.

When `msdcfg.SDETRCALW` = 0, external trace is disallowed for the SD. All trace
output from the trace encoder module are disabled while the SD is active on a
per-hart basis.

> When `msdcfg.SDEDBGALW` = 1 then external trace of privilege modes less than

Reviewer: msdcfg.SDEDBGALW -> msdcfg.SDETRCALW

`M-mode` shall be allowed for the SD on a per hart basis.

==== `Smsdetrc`: interaction with external trace security controls (Informative)

This section will be moved into the specification for external debug security.
It is described in this specification as informational.

The `metrcen` is an enable control for external trace for the `M-mode` driven by
an external trace module and is expected to be established by the RoT (following
RISC-V security model recommendations SR_GEN_007 and 012). When privilege is
`M-mode`, the `metrcen` determines the state of the `halted` side band signal sent by the hart to the

> trace encoder. Per the Efficient trace specification cite:[Etrc], this side-band

Author: ```suggestion
trace encoder. Per the Efficient trace specification cite:[ETrc], this side-band
```

configuration held in `msdcfg.SDEDBGALW`.

When `msdcfg.SDEDBGALW` = 0, external debug is disallowed for the SD. Abstract
commands and halt request from the debug module are suppressed and stay pending
while the SD is active, on a per-hart basis. Other debug operations (current or
defined in the future) must similarly be kept pending while the SD is active on
a hart.

When `msdcfg.SDEDBGALW` = 1 then external debug of privilege modes less than
`M-mode` is allowed for the SD on a per-hart basis, and:

* A valid request (e.g. `halt`) or a trigger matching/firing may transition the hart to
Debug Mode. See other cases in RISC-V Debug specification cite:[ExtDbg]. 
Note that the `resethaltreq` is not applicable since it can be done only
following a reset and the hart cannot be at privilege mode less than
`M-mode` with `msdcfg.SDEDBGALW`=1 at de-assertion of reset.
* Abstract commands and program buffer execution can access state of privilege
modes less than `M-mode`. In this context, "state" includes all resources
accessible per the Debug specification cite:[ExtDbg].
* Read and Write of `Sdtrig` and `Sdext` CSRs are allowed.

> * Debugger memory accesses may occur with `S-mode` or `U-mode` privilege per
> software execution in the SD, and as if `aamvirtual` = 1 and `MPP` != `M-mode`.

Author: ```suggestion
* Debugger memory accesses may occur with `S-mode` or `U-mode` privilege per
software execution in the SD, and as if `aamvirtual` = 1 and `MPP` != `M-mode`
and `relaxedpriv`=0.
```

[[chapter8]]
[[Smsdedbg]]
== Supervisor Domain External Trace and Debug

The <<MSDCFG>> CSR contains the `sdedbgalw` and `sdetrcalw` bits that control

> if the current scheduled SD is allowed to be external-debugged cite:[ExtDbg]
> or to be external-traced, respectively. External trace refers to tracing

Author: ```suggestion
if the current scheduled SD is allowed to be external-debugged or to be
external-traced cite:[ExtDbg], respectively. External trace refers to tracing
```

[title= "External Debug for Supervisor Domain", id=Smsdedbg_img]
image::images/Smsdedbg.png[]

This section will be moved into the specification for external debug security.
It is described in this specification as informational.

The `medbgen` is an enable control for external debug for the M-mode driven by
the debug module and is expected to be established by the RoT (following RISC-V
Security Model recommendation SR_GEN_007 and SR_GEN_012). When privilege is `M`,
the `medbgen` gates the `haltreq` from the debug module and if is 0 prevents
the hart from entering external debug mode.

The following change is proposed to behavior of `M-mode` access to triggers with
`dmode` = 1. This change allows the RDSM to remain in control of external debug
for supervisor domains (unless the RDSM is itself under external debug in which
case this relaxation is a don't care condition).

When `medbgen` is 0 and privilege is `M-mode`:

* M-mode can read and write triggers, *including triggers with `dmode` = 1
without restrictions*.
* Abstract commands and requests from an external debugger, that transition the
hart into a halted state, stay pending while privilege is `M-mode` cite:[ExtDbg].

> * All trigger-matching is prevented from matching or firing, similar to how
> `MIE` or `MTE` would behave.

Author: ```suggestion
* All trigger-matching is prevented from matching or firing, similar to how
`MIE` or `MTE` would behave. This behavior is specifically as stated in
section 5.4 of cite:[ExtDbg]: While `MIE` in `mstatus` is 0, the hardware
prevents triggers with `action`=0 from matching or firing while in `M-mode` .
Also from section 5.7.6 of cite:[ExtDbg], M-mode trigger enable `mte`=0
(disabled) specifies that triggers with `action`=0 do not match/fire
while the hart is in M-mode.
```

[[chapter8]]
[[Smsdedbg]]
== Supervisor Domain External Trace and Debug

The <<MSDCFG>> CSR contains the `sdedbgalw` and `sdetrcalw` bits that control
if the current scheduled SD is allowed to be external-debugged or to be
external-traced cite:[ExtDbg], respectively. External trace refers to tracing
software running on a separate target RISC-V platform, via a trace control/data
transport that provides external access to the trace encoder controls
cite:[ETrc]. This extension only affects debug or trace orchestrated by an
external actor. Self-hosted debug (and trace) are managed by the RDSM.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
This sub-specification refers to the Debug specification cite:[ExtDbg],
Trace specification cite:[ETrc], and the External debug security extension
cite:[ExtDbgSec] for the description and behavior of controls outside
the scope of this specification, but which interact with controls
specified in this specification when supervisor domains are used.
```

commands and halt request from the debug module are suppressed and stay pending
while the SD is active, on a per-hart basis. Other debug operations (current or
defined in the future) must similarly be kept pending while the SD is active on
a hart.

When `msdcfg.SDEDBGALW` = 1 then external debug of privilege modes less than
`M-mode` is allowed for the SD on a per-hart basis, and:

* A valid request (e.g. `halt`) or a trigger matching/firing may transition the hart to
Debug Mode. See other cases in RISC-V Debug specification cite:[ExtDbg]. 
Note that the `resethaltreq` is not applicable since it can be done only
following a reset and the hart cannot be at privilege mode less than
`M-mode` with `msdcfg.SDEDBGALW`=1 at de-assertion of reset.
* Abstract commands and program buffer execution can access state of privilege
modes less than `M-mode`. In this context, "state" includes all resources
accessible per the Debug specification cite:[ExtDbg].
* Read and Write of `Sdtrig` and `Sdext` CSRs are allowed.
* Debugger memory accesses may occur with `S-mode` or `U-mode` privilege per
software execution in the SD, and as if `aamvirtual` = 1 and `MPP` != `M-mode`
and `relaxedpriv`=0.

> ==== `Smsdedbg` interaction with external debug security controls (Informative)

Author: ```suggestion
==== `Smsdedbg` interaction with external debug security controls (Informative)

This section will be moved into the specification for external debug security.
It is described in this specification as informational.

```

[caption="Figure {counter:image}: ", reftext="Figure {image}"]
[title= "External Debug for Supervisor Domain", id=Smsdedbg_img]
image::images/Smsdedbg.png[]

> This section will be moved into the specification for external debug security.
> It is described in this specification as informational.

Author: ```suggestion
```

used as independent extensions even when a single supervisor domain is being
utilized on a platform.

[NOTE]
====
The configuration for `msdcfg.sdedbgalw` and `msdcfg.sdetrcalw` is expected to
be obtained from the manifest/configuration of the supervisor domain and
reported in the attestation report for the supervisor domain and it's workloads.
The RDSM should manage this supervisor domain configuration state for context
switching using secure memory.
====

=== `Smsdedbg`: External Debug allowed control for Supervisor Domain

When M-mode external debug is enabled, all supervisor domains may also be
debugged by an external debugger irrespective of the configuration held in
`msdcfg.sdedbgalw`.

When M-mode external debug is disabled, whether execution at privilege modes
less than `M-mode` may be debugged by an external debugger depends on the
configuration held in `msdcfg.sdedbgalw`, as described below:

When `msdcfg.sdedbgalw` is 0:

* Access by external debuggers to the memory and/or state of the supervisor domain is disallowed.
* Entry to Debug Mode from a supervisor domain is disallowed.

When `msdcfg.sdedbgalw` = 1 then external debug of privilege modes less than

> `M-mode` is allowed for such a supervisor domain on a per-hart basis. +

Author: ```suggestion
`M-mode` is allowed for such a supervisor domain on a per-hart basis, 
with the additional requirements listed below. +
```

with the additional requirements listed below. +

To enforce the above controls specified by this extension, the following
functional and security requirements must be met by the external secure debug
system cite:[ExtDbgSec] to meet the security objectives of supervisor domain

> isolation:

Reviewer 2: To enforce the above controls specified by this extension, the following
functional and security requirements must be met by the external secure debug
system cite:[ExtDbgSec]:

> To enforce the above controls specified by this extension, the following
> functional and security requirements must be met by the external secure debug
> system cite:[ExtDbgSec] to meet the security objectives of supervisor domain
> isolation:

Author: ```suggestion
To enforce the above controls specified by this extension, the following
functional and security requirements must be met by the external secure debug
system cite:[ExtDbgSec]:
```

. External debug of M-mode can be enabled only by the HW RoT of the RDSM
 (See RISC-V Security model requirements SR_GEN_007 and SR_GEN_012).

> . External debug must be able to access supervisor domain memory and/or state. 
>   In this context, "state" includes all supervisor domain resources accessible per the 
>   Debug specification cite:[ExtDbg].
> . Entry to Debug Mode from a supervisor domain is allowed.

Author: ```suggestion
```

  This functional change allows the RDSM to remain in control of external debug
  for supervisor domains when it is not under external debug itself.

=== `Smsdetrc`: External Trace allowed control for Supervisor Domain

When M-mode external trace is enabled, all supervisor domains activity may also
be traced by an external trace tool irrespective of the configuration held in
`msdcfg.sdetralw`.

When M-mode external trace is disabled, whether execution at privilege modes
less than `M-mode` may be traced by an external trace tool depends on the
configuration held in `msdcfg.sdetrcalw`, as described below:

When `msdcfg.sdetrcalw` = 0, external trace of the supervisor domain is disallowed.

When `msdcfg.sdetrcalw` = 1 then external trace of privilege modes less than

> `M-mode` shall be allowed for the SD on a per hart basis.

Author: ```suggestion
`M-mode` shall be allowed for the SD on a per hart basis, with the
additional requirements listed below.
```

`M-mode` shall be allowed for the SD on a per hart basis, with the
additional requirements listed below.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

. When external tracing is disabled, tracing must be stopped on:
.. entry to Debug mode
.. entry to `M-mode` privilege
.. entry to privilege less than `M-mode` with `msdcfg.sdetrcalw` = 0.

```

To enforce the above controls specified by this extension, the following
functional and security requirements must be met by the external secure debug
system cite:[ExtDbgSec] to meet the security objectives of supervisor domain

> isolation:

Reviewer 2: To enforce the above controls specified by this extension, the following
functional and security requirements must be met by the external secure debug
system cite:[ExtDbgSec]:

> To enforce the above controls specified by this extension, the following
> functional and security requirements must be met by the external secure debug
> system cite:[ExtDbgSec] to meet the security objectives of supervisor domain
> isolation:

Author: ```suggestion
To enforce the above controls specified by this extension, the following
functional and security requirements must be met by the external debug security
system cite:[ExtDbgSec]:
```

. External trace of M-mode can be enabled only by the HW RoT of the RDSM
 (See RISC-V Security model requirements SR_GEN_007 and SR_GEN_012).
. When external tracing is disabled, tracing must be stopped on:

> .. entry to Debug mode

Reviewer 2: Suggesting placing second bullet under the clause "When `msdcfg.sdetrcalw` = 1". Otherwise the context for "when external tracing is disabled" is lost.

be traced by an external trace tool irrespective of the configuration held in
`msdcfg.sdetralw`.

When M-mode external trace is disabled, whether execution at privilege modes
less than `M-mode` may be traced by an external trace tool depends on the
configuration held in `msdcfg.sdetrcalw`, as described below:

When `msdcfg.sdetrcalw` = 0, external trace of the supervisor domain is disallowed.

When `msdcfg.sdetrcalw` = 1 then external trace of privilege modes less than
`M-mode` shall be allowed for the SD on a per hart basis, with the
additional requirements listed below.

To enforce the above controls specified by this extension, the following
functional and security requirements must be met by the external secure debug
system cite:[ExtDbgSec] to meet the security objectives of supervisor domain
isolation:

. External trace of M-mode can be enabled only by the HW RoT of the RDSM
 (See RISC-V Security model requirements SR_GEN_007 and SR_GEN_012).
. When external tracing is disabled, tracing must be stopped on:
.. entry to Debug mode
.. entry to `M-mode` privilege
.. entry to privilege less than `M-mode` with `msdcfg.sdetrcalw` = 0.

> . When external tracing is disabled, tracing must be started on:

Reviewer: Is `disabled` a typo? 
However, even if it intends to mean `enabled` here, the tracing does not necessarily start because it is additional controlled by `trTeEnable`

Author: actually, that second point is not needed any more. removing it.

> . When external tracing is disabled, tracing must be started on:
> .. Entry to privilege less than `M-mode` with `msdcfg.sdetrcalw` = 1

Author: ```suggestion
```

====

=== `Smsdedbg`: External Debug allowed control for Supervisor Domain

When M-mode external debug is enabled, all supervisor domains may also be
debugged by an external debugger irrespective of the configuration held in
`msdcfg.sdedbgalw`.

When M-mode external debug is disabled, whether execution at privilege modes
less than `M-mode` may be debugged by an external debugger depends on the
configuration held in `msdcfg.sdedbgalw`, as described below:

When `msdcfg.sdedbgalw` is 0:

* Access by external debuggers to the memory and/or state of the supervisor domain is disallowed.
* Entry to Debug Mode from a supervisor domain is disallowed.

When `msdcfg.sdedbgalw` = 1 then external debug of privilege modes less than
`M-mode` is allowed for such a supervisor domain on a per-hart basis. +

To enforce the above controls specified by this extension, the following
functional and security requirements must be met by the external secure debug
system cite:[ExtDbgSec] to meet the security objectives of supervisor domain
isolation:

. External debug of M-mode can be enabled only by the HW RoT of the RDSM
 (See RISC-V Security model requirements SR_GEN_007 and SR_GEN_012).

> . External debug must be able to transition the hart to Debug Mode and access
>   supervisor domain memory and state. In this context, "state" includes all
>   non-M-mode resources accessible per the Debug specification cite:[ExtDbg].
> . Triggers must match and fire on a hart only when a supervisor domain with this
>   configuration is active on a hart (and not in M-mode).

Author: ```suggestion
. External debug must be able to access supervisor domain memory and/or state. 
  In this context, "state" includes all supervisor domain resources accessible per the 
  Debug specification cite:[ExtDbg].
. Entry to Debug Mode from a supervisor domain is allowed.
```

  for supervisor domains when it is not under external debug itself.

=== `Smsdetrc`: External Trace allowed control for Supervisor Domain

When M-mode external trace is enabled, all supervisor domains activity may also
be traced by an external trace tool irrespective of the configuration held in
`msdcfg.sdetralw`.

When M-mode external trace is disabled, whether execution at privilege modes
less than `M-mode` may be traced by an external trace tool depends on the
configuration held in `msdcfg.sdetrcalw`, as described below:

When `msdcfg.sdetrcalw` = 0, external trace of the supervisor domain is disallowed.

When `msdcfg.sdetrcalw` = 1 then external trace of privilege modes less than
`M-mode` shall be allowed for the SD on a per hart basis.

To enforce the above controls specified by this extension, the following
functional and security requirements must be met by the external secure debug
system cite:[ExtDbgSec] to meet the security objectives of supervisor domain
isolation:

. External trace of M-mode can be enabled only by the HW RoT of the RDSM
 (See RISC-V Security model requirements SR_GEN_007 and SR_GEN_012).

> . When external tracing is disabled, tracing should be stopped (via asserting
>   `halted`) on:
> .. entry to Debug mode
> .. entry to `M-mode` privilege
> .. entry to privilege less than `M-mode` with `msdcfg.sdetrcalw` = 0.
> . When extracing tracing is disabled, tracing should be started (via deasserting
>   `halted`) on:
> .. Entry to privilege less than `M-mode` with `msdcfg.sdetrcalw` = 0

Author: ```suggestion
. When external tracing is disabled, tracing must be stopped on:
.. entry to Debug mode
.. entry to `M-mode` privilege
.. entry to privilege less than `M-mode` with `msdcfg.sdetrcalw` = 0.
. When external tracing is disabled, tracing must be started on:
.. Entry to privilege less than `M-mode` with `msdcfg.sdetrcalw` = 1
```

When M-mode external trace is enabled, all supervisor domains activity may also
be traced by an external trace tool irrespective of the configuration held in
`msdcfg.sdetralw`.

When M-mode external trace is disabled, whether execution at privilege modes
less than `M-mode` may be traced by an external trace tool depends on the
configuration held in `msdcfg.sdetrcalw`, as described below:

When `msdcfg.sdetrcalw` = 0, external trace of the supervisor domain is disallowed.

When `msdcfg.sdetrcalw` = 1 then external trace of privilege modes less than
`M-mode` shall be allowed for the SD on a per hart basis, with the
additional requirements listed below.

. When external tracing is disabled, tracing must be stopped on:
.. entry to Debug mode
.. entry to `M-mode` privilege
.. entry to privilege less than `M-mode` with `msdcfg.sdetrcalw` = 0.

To enforce the above controls specified by this extension, the following
functional and security requirements must be met by the external debug security
system cite:[ExtDbgSec]:

. External trace of M-mode can be enabled only by the HW RoT of the RDSM
 (See RISC-V Security model requirements SR_GEN_007 and SR_GEN_012).

> . When external tracing is disabled, tracing must be stopped on:
> .. entry to Debug mode
> .. entry to `M-mode` privilege
> .. entry to privilege less than `M-mode` with `msdcfg.sdetrcalw` = 0.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

current scheduled SD is allowed to be external-debugged. This bit is context
switched (along with rest of the `msdcfg`) per SD.

When M-mode external debug is enabled, all supervisor domains may also be
debugged by an external debugger irrespective of the configuration held in
`msdcfg.SDEDBGALW`.

When M-mode external debug is disabled, whether execution at privilege modes
less than `M-mode` may be debugged by an external debugger depends on the
configuration held in `msdcfg.SDEDBGALW`.

When `msdcfg.SDEDBGALW` = 0, external debug is disallowed. Abstract commands

> and halt request from the debug module are suppressed and stay pending.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and halt request from the Debug Module are suppressed and stay pending.
```

image::images/Smsdedbg.png[]

This section will be moved into the specification for external debug security.
It is described in this specification as informational.

The `medbgen` is an enable control for external debug for the M-mode driven by
the debug module and is expected to be established by the RoT (following RISC-V
Security Model recommendation SR_GEN_007 and SR_GEN_012). When privilege is `M`,
the `medbgen` gates the `haltreq` from the debug module and if is 0 prevents
the hart from entering external debug mode.

The following change is proposed to behavior of `M-mode` access to triggers with
`dmode` = 1. This change allows the RDSM to remain in control of external debug
for supervisor domains (unless the RDSM is itself under external debug).

When `medbgen` is 0 and privilege is `M-mode`:

* M-mode can read and write triggers, *including triggers with `dmode` = 1
without restrictions*.
* Abstract commands and halt request from external debugger stay pending while
privilege is `M-mode`.
* All trigger-matching is suppressed (similar to how `MIE` or `MTE` would
suppress them)

When privilege is less than `M`, the OR of the `MSDCFG.sdedbgalw` and `medbgen`

> gates the `haltreq` from the debug module and the hart will enter external debug

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
gates the `haltreq` from the debug module and the hart will enter Debug
```

> mode if either is 1.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Mode if either is 1.
```

When `medbgen` is 1, there are no restrictions. When `medbgen` is 0 but
`MSDCFG.sdedbgalw` is 1, then the external debug mode may be entered but is
restricted by `M-mode` software to prevent privileged CSR accesses and memory

> accesses by instructions executed in external debug mode cannot use `M-mode`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
accesses by instructions executed in Debug Mode cannot use `M-mode`
```

privilege. When `medbgen` is 0 and `MSDCFG.sdedbgalw` is also 0, the `M-mode`
root domain security manager must not configure triggers with `action=1`.

> Triggers for the supervisor domain are expected to be controlled by the root

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Triggers for the supervisor domain must be controlled by the root
```

> domain security manager to prevent any leakage of information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
domain security manager to prevent any leakage of information across security domains.
```

> When `medbgen` is 1, there are no restrictions. When `medbgen` is 0 but

Reviewer: Please pay attention to this comment

> When `medbgen` is 1, there are no restrictions. When `medbgen` is 0 but

Reviewer 2: When medbgen is 1 then there are no restrictions on the type of debug. For example, the debugger can gain run control and single step M-mode and change its register state. This does not mean that the debugger can do what it could not otherwise do such as writing to a ROM, or  changing a locked PMP.

> When `medbgen` is 1, there are no restrictions. When `medbgen` is 0 but

Reviewer: Exactly, your comments has to explicitly address in spec, because the Debug spec defines the behavior to bypass locked PMP. Thus, obviously "no restrictions" cannot be said.

> When `medbgen` is 1, there are no restrictions. When `medbgen` is 0 but

Reviewer 2: The debug specification allows for bypassing a locked PMP and it should be when M is under external debug. There is no  need to restrict anything that can be done in debug mode when external debug is enabled. Bypassing PMP is no worse than executing instructions of debuggers choice from the program buffer and having full run control on M-mode.

> When `medbgen` is 1, there are no restrictions. When `medbgen` is 0 but

Reviewer: There is no definition in debug spec to support the argument "The debug specification allows for bypassing a locked PMP and it should be when M is under external debug. "

> When `medbgen` is 1, there are no restrictions. When `medbgen` is 0 but

Reviewer 2: > There is no definition in debug spec to support the argument "The debug specification allows for bypassing a locked PMP and it should be when M is under external debug. "

Anything and everything that the debug specification allows to occur for M-mode external debug should be allowed when M-mode is under external debug. This includes single stepping M-mode to and skipping over the locking of the PMPs themself.

> When `medbgen` is 1, there are no restrictions. When `medbgen` is 0 but

Reviewer: >There is no definition in debug spec to support the argument "The debug specification allows for bypassing a locked PMP and it should be when M is under external debug. "
Sorry for confusion, what I mean is debug spec doesn't have definition to support  argument "....when M is under external debug", that is when sub-M mode is allowed to debug, relaxedpriv could also be set. 

That's why no restrictions" cannot be said. It has to restrict relaxedpriv.

> When `medbgen` is 1, there are no restrictions. When `medbgen` is 0 but

Reviewer 2: That is unrelated to this comment thread which is about medbgen=1. 
I agree that the "as if `aamvirtual` = 1 and `MPP` != `M-mode`" should be expanded "as if `aamvirtual` = 1 and `MPP`!=`M-mode` and `relaxedpriv`=0"

> When `medbgen` is 1, there are no restrictions. When `medbgen` is 0 but

Reviewer: Sorry for the deviation. 
Let me rephrase it:
even for the mdbgen=1, relaxedpriv has to be restricted.

>"Bypassing PMP is no worse than executing instructions of debuggers choice from the program buffer and having full run control on M-mode."

1. M-mode cannot bypass locked PMP
2. relaxedpriv affect program buffer as well

Overall, with `relaxedpriv` uncontrained give the external debugger the capability even beyond the M-mode

> When `medbgen` is 1, there are no restrictions. When `medbgen` is 0 but

Reviewer 2: I don't see motivation for doing that when medbgen is 1. When medbgen is 1 all M-mode resources are fair game. medbgen can be used to prevent the PMP from being locked by M-mode in the first place.

> When `medbgen` is 1, there are no restrictions. When `medbgen` is 0 but

Reviewer: There is lifecycle requirement to mandate it. Even for M-mode, there are potentially multiple actors. Locked PMP can never be bypassed.
![logical_sec_model_fig1](https://github.com/riscv/riscv-smmtt/assets/21162377/75d49f9c-6bad-44aa-b71a-c37e0efbb57e)

`MSDCFG.sdedbgalw` is 1, then the external debug mode may be entered but is

> restricted by `M-mode` software to prevent privileged CSR accesses and memory

Reviewer: "restricted by `M-mode` software" is a confusing statement. The extension is a HW/SW co-work solution, not pure software thing.

Author: agree - added clarification that M-mode software controls the policy via the msdcfg control bit sdedbalw which gates external debug.

> accesses by instructions executed in Debug Mode cannot use `M-mode`

Reviewer: Not only instructions in program buffer  but also abstract commands

Author: ack.

privilege. When `medbgen` is 0 and `MSDCFG.sdedbgalw` is also 0, the `M-mode`

> root domain security manager must not configure triggers with `action=1`.

Reviewer: Even if the triggers are configure with `action=1`, it does yield any side effect, because it just cannot enter Debug Mode. The restriction her  seems redundant.

Author: removed this restriction and clarified with the enforcement that M-mode software should ensure that filter mcontrol.m bit should be clear.

Reviewer: "clarified with the enforcement that M-mode software should ensure that filter mcontrol.m bit should be clear." This restriction should not be made. It will de-feature self-hosted debug for machine mode

Author: not really - this is a software policy completely under m-mode control - don't see how it de-features self-hosted debug at all.

Triggers for the supervisor domain must be controlled by the root
domain security manager to prevent leakage of information across security
domains.

=== `Smsdetrc`: External Trace allowed control for Supervisor Domain

When M-mode external trace is enabled, all supervisor domains activity may also

> be traced by an external debugger irrespective of the configuration held in

Author: fixed

When `medbgen` is 1, there are no restrictions. When `medbgen` is 0 but
`MSDCFG.sdedbgalw` is 1, then the external debug mode may be entered but is
restricted by `M-mode` software to prevent privileged CSR accesses and memory
accesses by instructions executed in Debug Mode cannot use `M-mode`
privilege. When `medbgen` is 0 and `MSDCFG.sdedbgalw` is also 0, the `M-mode`
root domain security manager must not configure triggers with `action=1`.
Triggers for the supervisor domain must be controlled by the root
domain security manager to prevent any leakage of information across security domains.

=== `Smsdetrc`: External Trace allowed control for Supervisor Domain

> 

Author: the "halted" signal being reused in both debug and trace spec's is confusing.
Now that I understand you are referring to the trace optional side-band "halted" going from the hart to the trace encoder (per the etrace spec) - i think this makes sense. Also will mention that this optional side-band signal will be required when supervisor domains are implemented.

When M-mode external trace is enabled, all supervisor domains activity may also
be traced by an external debugger irrespective of the configuration held in
`msdcfg.SDETRCALW`.

When M-mode external trace is disabled, whether execution at privilege modes
less than `M-mode` may be traced by an external debugger depends on the
configuration held in `msdcfg.SDETRCALW`.

When `msdcfg.SDETRCALW` = 0, external trace is disallowed for the SD. All trace
output from the trace encoder module are disabled while the SD is active (the

> trace encoder must behave per `trTeEnable`=0).

Reviewer 4: This should be reviewed by the DTPM SIG.  Current discussion is that trace suppression as a result of METRCEN/SDETRCALW will appear akin to trace suppressed as a result of a hart entering the halted state.  I believe this differs from clearing of trTeEnable by virtue of the indication of why trace stopped.

Author: I see - but what is the control that suppresses the trace from the trace encoder - per the trace control interface that seems to be trTeEnable?

When `msdcfg.SDEDBGALW` = 1 then external trace of privilege modes less than
`M-mode` is allowed for the SD, and programming of `trTeActive` and `trTeEnable`
to 1 may transition the hart to enable trace for all privilege modes less than
`M-mode`.

==== `Smsdetrc`: interaction with external trace security controls (Informative)

> 

Reviewer 2: Why not:
When metrcen is 0, halted is asserted on:
  - Entry to Debug mode.
  - Entry to privilege M.
  - Entry to privilege < M with sdetrcalw == 0.
When metrcen is 0, halted is deasserted on:
  - Entry to privilege < M with sdetrcalw == 0.
When metrcen is 1, halted is asserted on:
  - Entry to Debug mode.
When metrcen is 1, halted is deasserted on:
  - Resume from Debug mode.

Author: thats the same as the following 

> When `metrcen` is 0 and privilege is `M-mode`, `M-mode` activity cannot be
> traced and `M-mode` software can enforce that `trTeEnable` is set to the state
> of `msdcfg.SDETRCALW` for the SD it context switches the hart into.

Author: ack

This section will be moved into the specification for external debug security.
It is described in this specification as informational.

> The `metrcen` is an enable control for external race for the `M-mode` driven by

Reviewer 4: race -> trace

> The `metrcen` is an enable control for external race for the `M-mode` driven by

Author: ```suggestion
The `metrcen` is an enable control for external trace for the `M-mode` driven by
```

an external trace module and is expected to be established by the RoT (following
RISC-V security model recommendations SR_GEN_007 and 012). When privilege is

> `M-mode`, the `medbgtrc` gates the `trTEActive` control into the hart trace

Reviewer 4: medbgrc -> metrcen

> `M-mode`, the `medbgtrc` gates the `trTEActive` control into the hart trace

Author: ```suggestion
`M-mode`, the `metrcen` gates the `trTEActive` control into the hart trace
```

privilege. When `medbgen` is 0 and `MSDCFG.sdedbgalw` is also 0, the `M-mode`
root domain security manager must not configure triggers with `action=1`.
Triggers for the supervisor domain must be controlled by the root

> domain security manager to prevent any leakage of information across security

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
domain security manager to prevent leakage of information across security
```

The `metrcen` is an enable control for external trace for the `M-mode` driven by
an external trace module and is expected to be established by the RoT (following
RISC-V security model recommendations SR_GEN_007 and 012). When privilege is

> `M-mode`, the `metrcen` gates the `halted` signal (from the hart) into the hart

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`M-mode`, the `metrcen` determines the state of the `halted` side band signal sent by the hart to the
```
